In this case, we will be exploring the Inpatient Data publicized by Vermont State and investigate how big and rich players exercise monopolistic power in the market. In particular, we want to test whether in more complex procedures among the Major Diagnostic Categories MDCs the larger hospitals attract more of the well-paid Commercial insurance patients and fewer government paid Medicare beneficiaries.<br/>
To do that, we will construct four Origin-Destination matrices to model the referral patterns among hospitals, including the big and the small ones, in Vermont. Elements on the diagonal line of any one matrix show the number or percentage of the care that is rendered with no referral involved. In the first matrix, we will be investigating the local treatment and referral percentage of hospitals in circulatory system treatment (MDC code: 5) for commercial insurance beneficiaries, which is believed to be a high-end care.<br/>
In the second, we will be looking at the market of the same care for government-sponsored insurance beneficiaries. If the claim reported by CNBC holds true, we shall see that the ‘magnet’ hospital, University of Vermont Health Center, located in the Burlington area will admit a large number of commercial insurance beneficiaries in this MDC category by referrals from other hospitals; whereas, it will absorb fewer patients with government-sponsored insurance.<br/>
In the third and fourth matrix, we will be looking at the local treatment and referral percentage of hospitals in musculoskeletal care (MDC code: 8), which does not require highly specialized staff and super fancy technology. Since treatment for illness in this category does not generate large cash flow, we expect to see lower referral rate from community hospitals to University of Vermont Health Center, however, we expect to see that University of Vermont Health Center will have a large market share for musculoskeletal treatment in the first place, owing to its monopolistic status in the region.<br/>
